---

Throwing Basics

There are two basic ways to use the shuriken: 

Daken-jutsu    Throwing techniques 
Shoken-jutsu   Hand-to-hand techniques 

These methods are really two possible outcomes of the same exact circumstance: A blade (or any object) is hidden in the hand of a person who must defend himself from an armed attacker. This is an important concept in our training. When we practice, we try to cultivate a sense of preparedness for any use, not just throwing.

Daken-jutsu    Throwing Techniques
A shuriken can be any object, it does not have to be a blade. It could be a pencil, chopstick, paintbrush or a tool. The shuriken may be thrown without preparation or hesitation. In this respect, it is faster than the bow and arrow, the sword or even the gun. A shuriken can allow you to hit an enemy 
who is too far away for punching or kicking. There is an effective limit to this ability, however, which is usually ten meters. In budo, distance is measured in ken, which is equal to the length of one tatami mat or the distance the average swordsman can reach with his sword held out at arm’s length, 
approximately 70 inches (180 cm).

The length of your throw is determined by measuring the distance between your front foot and the target at the time of the release. In the old budo schools, the practiced limit for shuriken-jutsu was three tatami mats’ length. (sangen) which is about 17 feet (5.4 meters ). In a real fight, this is not 
much distance. It is a good idea to be able to throw from slightly further distances, such as 22 feet (7.2 meters) (yongen) and 29 feet (9 meters) (goken). 

When a human throws an object, his arm moves in a circle. The arm is a line that is stationary at one end, the shoulder, and may move freely from there. Punching tends to be a straight, extending movement. Punching can generate a lot of power, but throwing generates great speed. Throwing a shuriken is not done by extending the arm towards the target. Shuriken are thrown by moving the arm in a circular motion, much like throwing a baseball. Because the arm rotates during the throwing motion, the object 
that is being thrown will also rotate. The art of shuriken-jutsu is the art of controlling the rate at which thrown objects will rotate as they fly through the air.

The arm rotates, so the shuriken also rotates.

Shuriken, like all other missiles, are subject to gravity and exhibit a parabolic flight path. If one were to simply “push” the shuriken straight at the target, it would simply bounce off, having turned in flight because of low speed, gravity and uncontrolled rotation. The success of the throw depends 
upon your ability to control the velocity and speed of rotation. Once you master this concept, you will become able to throw almost any linear object with success.

There are three ways to throw the bo shuriken: 

1. Jikidaho    (direct hit)
2. Hantendaho    (reverse hit) 
3. Takaitendaho    (fast spinning, like knife throwing)

Japanese schools employ jikidaho or hantendaho for bo shuriken and takai-tendaho for shaken shuriken. 

Jikidaho    Direct Hit Throwing
Jikidaho is the direct hit method of throwing. This means that the shuriken is held with the tip pointing out, away from the palm. When you throw the shuriken, it leaves your hand with its point in the air and its tail towards the ground. As it flies, it turns slowly, so that the  shuriken is horizontal just before it strikes the target.

The jikidaho grip: The shuriken lies between the first and second fingers. The thumb presses the shuriken against the base of the third finger. The butt of the shuriken rests against the palm near the base of the thumb. (Above that upside-down “Y.”) This is one of the reasons that bo shuriken 
of square cross-section are so much easier to throw than other designs. The facets of the blade cause it to fi t perfectly in the gap between your first and second fingers. It also keeps the shuriken from sliding around during the throw and provides two flat surfaces for your fingers to brush during the 
release. The jikidaho method is the basis for many other throws, so it is important to master it.

The shuriken is released and it turns 90 degrees as it flies. This is a basic idea common to many 
shuriken schools. The Meifu Shinkage Ryu, however, employs a pushing with the palm against the 
base of the shuriken in its throw. 
Not only that, but the arm is flexed up and down and the wrist is snapped. This refined technique 
gives the shuriken a very fast, flat trajectory. The Meifu Shinkage Ryu shuriken is smaller than most: 
the size and shape were developed to take advantage of the school’s unique palm-pushing method.

This is the basic throwing grip.

Hantendaho    Reverse Hit Throwing
If you change the direction of the shuriken in your hand so that the point is touching your palm, this is the “hantendaho grip.” The shuriken, when thrown, will turn 180 degrees in the air before striking the target. This technique does not employ high-speed throwing techniques like the jikidaho 
throw. (No pushing with the palm, obviously, as you would impale yourself on the shuriken) The feeling of this throw is very similar to that of the curveball in baseball. 

Hantendaho is really just for practice in the Meifu Shinkage Ryu; it is a good way for beginners to enjoy throwing at a target from longer distances until they have mastered the jikidaho throw. It is also used for combat throwing with the heavier blades in other schools, like the Chishin Ryu.


Throwing Practice
Before you begin throwing, make sure that you have a matching set of clean, sharp blades. They should 
all be the exact same type, length, and weight. Try not to make too much noise when picking them up 
or putting them down. If you must speak while people are training, do so in a quiet voice. You do not 
want to distract someone who is throwing a live weapon nearby. Always use common sense.

Similar to some other martial arts, the practice of shuriken-jutsu begins from a natural, peaceful state. Try to cultivate a sense of calmness and serenity. This is the beginning, the kamae (attitude) of patience and non-hostility. When walking and standing, the shuriken should always be carried in the dominant hand or tucked into the obi. This is done for safety. The shuriken are in your dominant hand, but you keep them and your intentions secret.

Once you approach the target and are ready to begin, make sure you are holding the blades correctly, while in a natural stance (shizentai). With the back straight and with both hands curled in a light fist on the sides of the hips, face forward (towards the target) and quietly bow. 

This is the stance before beginning (kamae). Take a half step and transfer the shuriken.

Upon completing the bow, lightly take one step forward, transferring the blades from the throwing hand to the other hand. Do this very slowly and carefully. The shuriken should still be point-down. 

With the shuriken in the left hand, extend the left arm towards the target. The left arm should be pointing straight towards the target and the right hand should be resting on the right hip.

Left arm is extended toward the target. Bring the first blade to the right hand.

When you are ready, transfer one blade to the right hand by bringing the left hand down to the right. Bring the left arm back towards the target. Imagine your left arm is a rifl e aimed at the target.

The right hand holds one shuriken at the right hip. It may seem difficult to acquire the correct throwing grip on the shuriken in this position, but with practice, it will become natural. 

To raise your right hand for throwing, slide it up the right side of your body until the inside of your throwing wrist is firmly pressed against the side of your head above your ear. This is called the anchor point. It is important to keep your hand at the anchor point when you begin the throw to ensure 
consistency in your wrist angle and attitude. 

Put one blade in the right hand. This is the ready position for throwing.

Slide it up at a down-angle so as not to stick yourself with the point. You want to hide the fact that you are going to throw it. You may want to watch your own shadow and see if you can minimize the visible movement. Keep your right elbow in close. Keep your wrist cocked back so that the shuriken 
remains pointing up like an antennae. When the shuriken is raised, face the palm inwards and adopt a posture that conceals the shuriken within the hand. The shuriken should not be exposed until it is actually thrown.

As much as possible, you don’t want to reveal to the opponent that you have a shuriken and are preparing to throw it at him. If he sees it, he will evade it.

When you are ready to throw, you will take a half-step forward with the left foot. At the same time you pull your left hand back to your left hip and swing your throwing hand across your body to meet your left hand at your left hip. The throwing arm moves in a circular motion and is only stopped when it strikes the left hip. You may want to practice without any shuriken, trying to slap your left hip with your right hand.

Do it so that the slap makes a noise and the movement is smooth. 

The beginning of the throw. Brushing the blade away.

During the throw, keep your throwing hand cocked back so that the shuriken points at the sky throughout the throw. The shuriken will slide out of your hand, you do not “let go.” As it slides away, you will brush the back of the blade with your fingertips to control its rotation. 

Do not try to “throw” the shuriken and do not extend your arm towards the target. The wrist stays vertical and the arm moves in a circle. This seems to be difficult for many people, so have someone observe you during practice to make sure that you are doing it correctly. Even an untrained eye can 
tell you if your shuriken is pointed straight up, if your wrist stays cocked back, and if your right arm is moving smoothly to your left hip during the throw.

Follow through on the throw. Getting the next blade ready to throw.

If your right hand does not strike your left hip at the end of the throw, then you threw incorrectly. If you are a beginner, it is not important whether or not the shuriken sticks in the target. What matters is acquiring a feeling for the movement of the throw. The desire to sink your blades into the 
target is very strong and perfectly understandable, after all, that’s why we do it, but that desire is something you will have to control if you want to be successful. It seems like a contradiction, but budo is full of contradictions that you must simply accept and learn from. Follow the form and eventually you will have a “eureka” moment and the blades will start sticking.

After the first shuriken has been thrown, you should find both of your hands together at your left hip. At this time, you take the next shuriken from your left hand into your right hand. 

Then, you step back into your original throwing position with the left arm straight towards the target and the right hand pressed into the side of your head. You will repeat this process until you have thrown your last shuriken.

When you are training, you may throw all of your shuriken. In a fight, you should never throw the last shuriken. You keep it so that you will have a weapon for shoken-jutsu. In a way, all but one of your shuriken are for throwing. One of them must be thought of as unthrowable. Of course, you never know what’s going to happen, maybe you’ll have to throw it, but it is always a good idea to hold something back.

After the last shuriken has been thrown in combat, you will draw your sword. This is the reason the right hand is brought to the left hip after each throw. The sword is carried at the left hip. After you throw the last shuriken in training, you will perform zanshin. Both hands are opened and the right 
palm faces up near the belly. Lean forward slightly and turn the right hand over. (Both palms down). Take a moment to “feel” the surroundings without looking or moving. Then, slowly, bring your arms up in front of you and make an “X.”

Getting the next blade ready to throw.

This is similar to a kamae (posture) called jumonji. Jumonji means “In the shape of the number ten,” which, in Japanese, is like an X. It is a Japanese tradition in martial arts to carry nine shuriken, so the number ten can mean “the end.” (It doesn’t matter how many shuriken you actually have). 

Your position after the last blade is thrown. Lean forward and turn the right hand over.

Form the jumonji. Bow to the target.

After throwing it’s important to maintain the feeling.

You assume the shape of jumonji to express the idea that the violence is finished. (Jumonji also happens to be a defensive posture one can use in hand-to-hand combat.) You might want to consider that, in a real fight, you may have just killed someone. Just because you are done fighting does not mean that the event is over for you. You will have to live with what you have done for the rest of your life. If you have really bad luck, you may have to live with it in prison.

After jumonji, stand up straight, feet together, fists on hips, and bow to the target.

Before you walk to the target to retrieve your shuriken, it is imperative that you make sure everyone else is finished throwing, lest a stray shuriken hit you! If it is safe, then you may approach the target and pick them up. 
Pull out the stuck shuriken first and then pick up the shuriken that are on the ground. (You never know when one will fall out and hit you in the back of the head.) Pick them all up and carry them in your right hand, point-down.

Depending on the teacher’s wishes, you may be allowed to keep practicing or you may have to let someone else use the target. If that is the case, then you say, kotae, which means it is someone else’s turn.

This is the basic throw. There are advanced levels that you will learn that will lead you to the secret of Someya Sensei’s unsurpassed technique, but if any part of your basic throw is not mastered, you will never get there. 


The Iga Ryu teppan can be thrown in a manner similar to the bo shuriken except for the release. During the release, your right hand will twist slightly clockwise and your index finger and thumb will do the brushing. You still have to keep your wrist at the proper angle and brush the back of the blade, but it will be much easier to do with these heavy, wide and aerodynamic shuriken. The blade flies with the flat side facing the target. The Iga Ryu blade is basically a wing and aerodynamic forces will help straighten it during flight. The feeling of throwing the Iga Ryu blade is very different from a bo shuriken, but once you get it, they seem very easy to throw, like paper airplanes. You may wish to have a special target used only for these blades, because they can cause a great deal of damage.

---

The Jissen Kata

The jissen kata (combat throw) is practiced from shizentai. That is, no stance is taken and the blades are not exposed before the throw begins. You stand facing the target with your hands at your waist. Suddenly, and without warning, you will throw a single blade at the target and return to shizentai. Your kamae and technique will happen in the blink of an eye and then disappear just as quickly. This is the reality of throwing a shuriken in combat. Standing in kamae before you throw is only for training. To do so in a real fight would tell the opponent your intentions and ruin any chance of your throw being effective.

There are two distinct jissen kata movements unique to the Meifu Shinkage Ryu. No other school of shuriken-jutsu employs them. These movements give the Meifu Shinkage Ryu an uncommonly fast, hard-hitting throw. I chose to keep these two movements in a separate chapter because the study of such advanced movements, if undertaken before the student has mastered the basic throw, will slow down the progress of that student. 
The advanced movements rely totally on mastery of the basic throw. Keep this in mind. 

The first movement is the wrist snap. The wrist snap is a method of “condensing” the throw into a smaller area. Instead of the entire body being involved in the throw, the movements are refined and forced into a smaller area of the body, the wrist. Of course, if any part of your technique is weak, then the condensed weakness will be very apparent.

ADVANCED MEIFU SHINKAGE RYU SHURIKEN-JUTSU: THE JISSEN KATA 

To do the wrist snap, you begin the throw as normal. When you lift your foot to take that small step towards the target, your wrist will flex up so that the shuriken points down. When your foot hits the ground, your wrist will flex back the other way so that the shuriken is pointing up. Don’t take a slower step; you must throw as fast as a normal footstep. The overall movement is very short and quick. Viewed from the side, the arm appears to undulate and crack like a bullwhip. In effect, you are creating a bullwhip, forcing an energy wave along a line segment. As the energy wave travels down your arm, the remaining length of your arm decreases, forcing the wave to accelerate. The arm will also tend to snap back towards you and sweep to the outside rather than to the inside. These are side effects of using a much faster and more powerful throw. 

The wrist snap will create a much flatter trajectory for the shuriken and will increase penetration. It is also a strain on the arm and wrist; so don’t push yourself to master it quickly. I would take a break every five throws.

The next movement in the jissen kata is the squeeze. Squeezing refers to the fingers and thumb of the throwing hand during the release. Your fingers and thumb will squeeze the blade into your palm. The fingers will slide down the back of the blade a few centimeters. This is basically a condensed form of the brushing you learned in the basic throw. It happens during the second half of the snap shot and is a very short, fast movement.

---

