---

Uchibari

The uchibari is very similar to the Meifu Shinkage Ryu type bo shuriken. It is lighter and has tapered ends, but the differences in size and shape are not sufficient to warrant a different method of throwing. The only actual difference is in the anchor point. You need to be careful in deciding what 
is and what is not an uchibari. The larger blades, blades over 2 ounces (60 grams), are most likely Katori Shinto Ryu shuriken and they are thrown from farther back on the head and without any snap. They have the same shape, but Katori Shinto Ryu blades are much thicker. 

Katori Shinto Ryu blades run about 21/2 ounces (70 grams), while uchibari run about 11/3 ounces (38 grams) each.

Uchibari are singularly attractive blades, having a very sleek, sexy design. 
They were very popular, being claimed by several schools, including the Kukishinden Ryu and the Togakure Ryu.

Preparing to throw the uchibari. The uchibari anchor point is on the forehead.

The throw is the same basic bo shuriken method, but it starts from the front 
of the head and is a short, snappy movement.

---

Chishin Ryu

Chishin Ryu blades are much heavier than Meifu Shinkage Ryu blades, with a wider base that tapers the entire length of the shuriken towards the tip. This design gives the blade a natural tendency to penetrate deeply. It can be a difficult blade to throw well, but of all the bo shuriken, this design is 
arguably the most lethal. This can be thrown jikidaho (direct throw) or hantendaho (reverse throw). The basic throw is not very different from a standard bo shuriken throw, but you may notice that there is no wrist snap and much less flexing of the arm. Also, note that the throw is done with the right foot forward and there is no step, just a shifting of balance forward. 
The heavier the blade is, the less you flex the wrist. Also, the heavier the blade is, the easier it is to brush it during the throw. These examples are 6 inches (16cm) long and weigh 31/2 ounces (100g).


For heavier blades like this, the throw begins at the rear of the head, and maybe behind it. 

---

Shirai Ryu

Shirai Ryu blades are exceptionally long blades of round stock, like big needles. Because they have no facets and are so long (around 8 inches or 21cm) the hand is used in a unique way during the throw. The fingers guide and control the upper part of the blade, as usual, but the inside of the wrist is also 
employed, cupping the bottom of the blade. The shuriken makes a sort of “bridge” between the fingertips and the notch in your wrist that forms when the thumb is closed. During the throw itself, you have to push on the bottom of the blade with your wrist and palm. These are long blades; they need a lot 
of brushing. You must keep your wrist vertical until after the blade is gone from your hand. Throwing these long, slender blades feels somewhat like running a length of rope across your hand. It has that kind of feeling.

Throwing the Shirai Ryu blade as seen from the side, you can see how far back from the front.  

As the arm moves forward the Shirai Ryu Blade has left the hand the brushing begins and is heading towards the target.

Follow through on the throw allows for the selecting of the next blade held in the hand.


---

Nage-ya Shuriken

Nage-ya literally means “throwing arrow” or “dart.” There is a specific Japanese weapon referred to as a nage-ya, but I have chosen to use nage-ya to refer to a whole category of aerodynamic throwing weapons. In this instance, “dart” means a throwing weapon whose flight characteristics are intentionally modified by its design — notably tail fins, bristles, fletchings or a wrapping of cloth, string or paper. Nage-ya are also usually tapered towards both ends. (Compare Meifu Shinkage Ryu and Kono Ryu shuriken). These are both bo-shuriken, but they are sufficiently different in design to 
merit a separate category.

The Nage-ya or Uchi-ne


---

Kono Ryu shuriken

The bo shuriken, if it is not perfectly (or luckily) thrown, will not stick. The dart, nage-ya, does not depend entirely upon the skill of the thrower in order to fly straight and penetrate the target. The nage-ya, to varying degrees, will self-correct in flight, increasing the chances of success. You might think that such a design would be the best choice and see no reason for the more difficult bo shuriken, but nage-ya are larger, heavier and more expensive than bo shuriken, which means you’ll be able to carry fewer of them. 
There is another reason: If you ever need to throw something that is not a shuriken, you will find objects that fly like bo shuriken very common, but dart-like objects will be somewhat rare. Having said that, nage-ya do tend to cause more damage than bo shuriken because of their heavier weight and broader points.

---

Negishi Ryu Blade

Not every dart has a particularly effective aerodynamic design. Some ideas worked better than others. As always, the design will depend on the source material, the intended purpose and the amount of craftsmanship involved. 
The modern toy dart is a perfect throwing tool. The weight is distributed forward, the tail is light and provides maximum surface area and the tip is slender, sharp and hardened. It takes very little skill to throw one and cause it to stick into an object. The only problem with it is that it was intended only to penetrate a few millimeters and cause only a minimal amount of damage. 
If it were heavier and had a larger tip, it would be a formidable throwing weapon. Indeed, there were some shuriken that evolved into designs that very closely resemble modern darts. (See Juji-gata shuriken)

Juji-gata shuriken look very similar to modern darts.

Because of the increased weight and the effectiveness of the stabilizers (tail fins), these types of shuriken require a different throwing technique to maximize their chance at success. The throw does not appear to be very different from that of a standard bo shuriken, but it is different in several important ways. 

The blade is gripped differently, sitting in the hand between the first and third fingers, as opposed to the first and second. The thumb rests against the tail, which provides better retention in the hand than a bo shuriken. 

This is how you grip a Negishi Ryu shuriken.

The throw also differs in that the shuriken is held against the side of the head with the palm facing out. As the body moves forward, the elbow leads the throw, not the hand and the hand sweeps from the outside to the inside in a very circular movement. There is no snap shot possible with a dart. It 
would disrupt the flight of the blade and ruin the shot.


---


Negishi Ryu

All of the nage-ya type blades are thrown with a larger, slower throw than the smaller bo-shuriken. Heavier blades require a slower, more circular throw.

There are numerous pictures of Negishi Ryu blades in this book, so the shape ought to be familiar, but the throw is very different to what we have discussed. In many ways it is the opposite of the standard bo shuriken throw. To begin with, the body does not face the target squarely, as with the Meifu Shinkage Ryu. It is angled away from the target at 60 degrees. The palm faces out before the throw. Once the throw begins, the elbow leads the movement and when the hand moves, it sweeps from the outside 
in. There is some brushing required but not nearly as much as with a regular bo shuriken. As a matter of fact, the body moves so much differently with Negishi Ryu type blades, we often switch from one type to another during practice when our muscles become fatigued. One set of muscles for one kind of blade, one set of muscles for another. In the photos, pay attention to the initial hand position, the leading of the elbow and the final position of the hand, which is cocked back towards the rear more than with any other shuriken.

Be careful not to assume that, because the last picture shows Otsuka Sensei’s hand pointing forward, that this is the end of the arm’s movement — it is not. The arm keeps moving in a smooth arc to the left hip. If you were to stop the arm at this point it would ruin the throw and rob the shuriken 
of a great deal of energy.

---

Shaken

There were dozens of shaken designs, many of which had different purposes. Some were purely throwing weapons, some for hand-to-hand and throwing and some were used to deliver burning fuses, secret messages and even poison. Most had four points, some had 5, 6 and even 8 points, but the more points there were, the more difficult it was to throw and the less damage the shuriken would cause. There are two main kinds of shaken shuriken: Piercing blades and cutting blades. Piercing blades are made of 
thicker metal (.1 to .2 inches/4mm to 6mm) and have longer, more slender points. Cutting blades are made of thinner metal (.03 to .07 inches/1mm to 2mm) and often have smaller, knife-like points. Some are designed only to “stick,” some are designed only to cut. All shaken are capable of piercing 
or cutting. When we refer to cutting or piercing, we refer to the nature of the wounds they create in human flesh, not to their performance in practice targets. This is not a sport; these are not sporting goods. Never judge the capability of a weapon solely by its performance on inanimate target materials. 

The shaken is often thought of as an “easy” weapon to throw. It is in fact easier to stick in the target because of its many points, but developing power and accuracy in the throw is, in the author’s opinion, more difficult than with the bo shuriken. Because of their wider, more dangerous shapes, 
shaken are also more diffi cult to carry than bo shuriken. The traditional number of blades to be carried was nine, but anyone who thought they would actually need a lot of shuriken would carry as many as they could. 

The shaken with holes in the center could be strung together with a piece of cord. The shaken without holes could be carried between the folds of the wide obi (sash) worn around the waist. A samurai might only carry two or three but a ninja might carry more than a dozen, secreted in various pockets all over his body. 

Senban shuriken can be carried by tying them to a cord or rope.

For a ninja, the shuriken was far more than just a throwing weapon. The manner in which it was carried could serve a purpose. If the shuriken were placed in pockets over vital areas such as the chest, the back of the neck or the forearms, then they would serve as a kind of secret armor against sword 
cuts. They could be tied to the soles of their shoes as a kicking weapon. In these cases, they did not have to serve with 100% effectiveness; they only needed to work well enough to help you survive. Remember that Japanese armor was made of iron plate about .03 inches (1mm) thick. A shaken was 
usually .03 to .07 inches (1 to 2mm) thick. It would stop a sword cut just as well as any armor of that time and place.

Senban shuriken can be used as secret armor when tied together along the arm.

The method of throwing both kinds of shaken is similar, but with a few differences owing to the different weights and shapes. The Meifu Shinkage Ryu is primarily a bo shuriken school, but Someya Sensei did train with a kind of juji shaken, (cruciform shuriken) a piercing blade that was popular 
with many of the old budo schools. That throw will be presented here. Then we will have a look at the senban throw of Togakure Ryu (a cutting blade).


The basic grip resembles the “pistol” gesture: index finger straight, the rest of the fingers curled in. The tip of the index finger should lie just over the forward edge (not point) of the shuriken. This grip applies to almost any shaken. The index finger and the wrist cause the blade to spin, not the movement of the arm.

The juji shaken does not have cutting edges so the release for that blade is simpler than the Togakure Ryu senban. The Togakure Ryu senban requires a turning of the hand to keep the rear edges from slicing the palm as it flies away.

---

Juji Shaken

The juji shaken is thrown in a simple overhand manner. The grip is simple. The bottom three fingers wrap around the lower blade and the index finger covers just enough of the horizontal blade to make sure the shaken is aligned with the target during the throw. There is no need to spin the juji shaken rapidly due to its thickness (6mm). It has piercing type points as opposed to cutting points. It does need to spin a little, however, to fly accurately. The index finger creates spin by pulling down slightly on the forward-facing blade of the shuriken during the throw.


The juji shaken just as The hand and arm follow through 
it is being released. and prepare for the next throw.

---

Togakure Ryu Senban

The Togakure Ryu senban is a much thinner (.06 inches/1.6mm) piece of metal than the thick juji shaken (.23 inch/6mm). It is more of a cutting weapon than a piercing weapon. Because of this, and its light weight, it needs to be spun very rapidly in flight. The throw is much smaller and faster than a 
juji shaken. These blades, because of their light weight and thin profile, are also capable of being thrown side-hand very effectively.

They are often employed in greater numbers than the thicker, larger piercing-type shaken. As many as a dozen are drawn and held in the left hand in preparation for the right hand to draw them, one or two at a time, and throw them.

First we will look at the overhand throw and then we will discuss the sidehand throw.


The upper arm and wrist snap forward and back, moving as little as possible. You don’t want your arm to move too far forward or the blade will go into the ground. Try not to let your upper arm move at all during the throw. Snap the wrist forward and back about 10 inches (25 cm) at most. As you snap the wrist forward, your hand is going to turn inward so that your palm is facing you and your thumb is pointing up. The hand is turned inwards to allow the senban to clear your thumb without cutting you. As 
long as you don’t try to “hold” the senban, but merely allow it to “perch,” the blade will not turn inwards with your hand. It will keep rotating and fly straight to the target. Try to think of your hand as a “tool” that simply propels and spins the blade, not as a hand that is gripping and releasing something. It might even help to visualize one of those skeet throwers — it does not “hold” the skeet, it merely casts it.

Below is the overhand senban throw again, this time with no blade. Notice how, as the wrist snaps forward, the palm turns to the inside. If the palm does not turn, the bottom point will cut you as the blade begins to spin. Before the throw, the thumb is on the left hand side of the blade. As the throw begins, the thumb moves to the center. At the end of the throw, the thumb is all the way to the right.

The most common problem you may encounter is moving your arm too much during the throw. Note the short distance the arm moves.

To counter this, you may train with your left arm horizontal in front of your chest. Keep it in place as a “bumper” for your right arm. Eventually you will be able to throw without even touching your left arm.

Use the non-throwing arm as a bumper. 

The sidehand throw is somewhat unique to the Togakure Ryu. It is a very surreptitious movement where the throw is completed close to the body and hidden by the sleeves. In order for the shuriken to fly accurately sidehand, it must be spun very quickly. Hatsumi Sensei recommends practicing the throw with business cards. First we will look at the grip and then the throw from in front and behind the thrower. The reason we will look at the throw from behind is to see how the body and the arms hide the throw. Done properly, the throw will be invisible from behind and hard to see from in front. 

To begin, the senban should be held in the left hand, pressed against to the body. The right hand should also be kept pressed into the belly, low and inconspicuous. The right hand will slide the top senban off into the right palm and form the tenouchi.

Hold senban in the left hand. Slide out the first senban. 

The sidehand grip is formed by supporting the underside of the senban with the side of the middle finger, pressing down with the thumb and “hooking” the side of one point with the index finger. Be careful where you put your index finger. The senban will rotate around the index finger. 
This is what gives the sidehand throw such a high rate of spin. It does not rotate on its point, however. It rotates around the side of the point where it pushes against the finger. If you put your finger on the point, it will cut you when you throw it.

The right wrist then snaps quickly in the direction of the target. It is important to remember that this throw is a hidden movement, so if your target is to your left, you need to turn your body to the left to hide the throw. 
The elbow should stay in contact with your body during the throw. What makes the Togakure Ryu sidehand throw so unique is that it is the only shuriken throwing method that requires the arms to stay low, close to the body and well below the armpits.

The right wrist then snaps quickly in the direction of the target. It is important to remember that this throw is a hidden movement, so if your target is to your left, you need to turn your body to the left to hide the throw. The elbow should stay in contact with your body during the throw. 
What makes the Togakure Ryu sidehand throw so unique is that it is the only shuriken throwing method that requires the arms to stay low, close to the body and well below the armpits.


We don’t want any movement visible from the rear, and only minimal movement from the front. Note in the pictures above how the wrist turns but the arm moves very little and stays close to the body. This is unusual for any kind of throwing weapon. What this does for the thrower is to make his shuriken a complete surprise to the opponent, magnifying the power of a piece of metal into a weapon of tremendous psychological impact.

You should follow the formal routine for throwing bo shuriken when you throw shaken. Shaken are dangerous weapons, more dangerous than bo shuriken, and need to be treated with the same respect you would afford a firearm. A throwing routine helps eliminate random and unpredictable movement. If you drop one, the probability of it sticking in someone’s foot is 300% higher than if you dropped a bo shuriken. Their many points snag on skin and clothing all too easily. All shuriken need to be kept off of the floor and out of the way when not in use.

---

Teppan

Teppan shuriken are the category of blades that could be any size or shape of blade made out of sheet metal. Some of them are quite aerodynamic; some of them are decidedly not. They are usually much easier to fight with than they are to throw, but not always. They are also usually capable of more uses than a bo shuriken. They often have cutting edges as opposed to sharp points that can only pierce. In short, they serve a variety of useful, non-ballistic purposes exceeding any other kind of shuriken, but they may also be thrown. To throw them, the basic bo shuriken technique is fine. The weight and balance of each blade will be different, so your sensitivity needs to be developed to such a level that you can compensate during the throw. The Iga Ryu blade has a heavy tail, but it catches the wind well. At first, it might seem impossible to throw but after some practice, it may seem to be the easiest. The Tsugawa Ryu blade, with its cutting edges, will go through most practice targets easily, but it can be difficult to control during the release. 

Because of their design, teppan are also very good at being combined or lashed to other objects in order to create a new weapon or tool, such as an animal trap.


One rare kind of teppan worthy of note is the senbakoki blade. A senbakoki was a rice-threshing tool in use throughout Japan for hundreds of years. It is a wooden frame that supports a dozen or more 13-inch (35cm) long blades of triangular cross-section. The blades of the senbakoki have apparently been used to construct many kinds of weapons, including shuriken. Senbakoki shuriken can be thrown in the same manner as Tsugawa Ryu shuriken.

---

Kunai

There is one other type of Japanese weapon that could be called a teppan, but it is not normally considered a shuriken because of its size: the kunai. The kunai is basically a flat piece of metal with a handle and a leaf-shaped blade. They can be smaller than some large shuriken or as large as a short 
sword. The kunai is a kind of multi-tool, roughly made from iron plate (teppan) with unsharpened edges. The point was sharp and the edges would be rough from the kunai being used to shatter plaster and wood, to dig in rocky soil or as a prybar. It was not a knife; it was not made of tempered steel or polished. It was a cross between a garden trowel, axe and prybar. Ordinarily, this would not be considered a shuriken at all, but it certainly can be thrown and with devastating results. The method of throwing a 
kunai is the same as that for throwing a Japanese knife or sword. You grasp the handle like a knife and throw it like a knife, but during the release you also push with the palm. Pushing (or brushing) the handle with the palm 
and index finger slows the rotation of the blade, just as brushing with the fingers slows the rotation of a shuriken. It is the same principle, but on a larger, slower scale.

---

Tsugawa Ryu

The Tsugawa Ryu blade can be thrown in a fashion nearly identical to any bo-shuriken. The blade is gripped with it flat against the fingers, not the edge. (Don’t forget this blade has an inch of sharpened cutting surface on both sides at each end.) As the blade leaves the hand, you brush the flat 
with the middle finger. 

---

Iga Ryu

The Iga Ryu can be thrown in a manner similar to the bo shuriken except for the release. During the release, your right hand will twist slightly clockwise and your index finger and thumb will do the brushing. You still have to keep your wrist at the proper angle and brush the back of the blade, 
but it will be much easier to do with these heavy, wide and aerodynamic shuriken. The blade flies with the flat side facing the target. The Iga Ryu blade is basically a wing and aerodynamic forces will help straighten it during flight. The feeling of throwing the Iga Ryu blade is very different from a bo shuriken, but once you get it, they seem very easy to throw, like paper airplanes. You may wish to have a special target used only for these blades, because they can cause a great deal of damage.

---
