
---

Combat Techniques

The art of throwing shuriken has always been closely associated with the use of the sword. To teach the integration of the two arts, there are many kata for us to study. All of these exercises can be done with one or two shuriken. You can throw the second shuriken either before or after the first 
cut. These exercises come from the Meifu Shinkage Ryu. Before you begin, take a moment to calm yourself and become still inside. Try not to think about what you are going to do before it happens. Let throwing and cutting happen on their own, not as expressions of desire to perform well, (this is not a performance art or a sport) or as the execution of plans you have made for the immediate future. Throwing and cutting must be spontaneous, without premeditation, from the void.

(Despite Otsuka Sensei’s estimation of my skills, I am NOT particularly skilled in the use of the katana. I apologize for my imperfect form. The important thing to note is how the shuriken is incorporated into the ordinary use of the sword.)

1. Ipponme Zaho (Throwing and Cutting From a Seated Position)
With your sword sheathed, sitting in seiza, covertly slide your throwing hand up to your head with a minimum of observable movement. Throw the shuriken at the target. At the end of the throw, your throwing hand will grasp the handle of your sword. Rise up and take a step with your right foot as you draw and cut horizontally to the throat of the opponent. Slide your left leg underneath you. Take another step with your right foot as you cut again straight down to the head. Sheathe your blade and return to seiza. Cutting and stepping should take place at the same time.


2. Ipponme  (Throwing and Cutting From a Standing Position)
As with #1, your right hand will throw a shuriken. Draw the sword at the end of the throw and cut upwards across the chest (kesa). Step forward with the left foot and thrust to the throat, resting the back of the blade in the crook of your left elbow. (Be careful!) Step back with the left foot as you 
cut back down across the chest.


3. Nihonme (Throwing From the Draw)
From a standing position, step back with the left foot and prepare to draw and cut with your sword. When you grasp the sword, take a shuriken from your left hand and throw it instead. After you throw the shuriken, draw the sword and cut. There are two variations to this technique. You may do it as written, or you may grasp the sword with the right hand and throw the shuriken with your left hand before drawing the sword. In either case, both hands need to be on the sword when you draw for practical and safety reasons.



Sanbanme (Throwing During a Cut)
From a standing position, draw the sword with a shuriken in your right palm. 
Hold the sword in jodan or hasso no kamae. With the intention of cutting, release the sword with the right hand and hold it with your left hand as you throw the shuriken hidden in your right palm. Alternately, you may draw a shuriken from some other location, such as the collar. 

The Tsugawa Ryu blade can be hidden in the collar.


Henka-uchi (Unconventional Throwing Methods)
These are the methods of throwing the shuriken in an unforeseeable manner; a surprise throw that does not exhibit obvious throwing movements that could be recognized. These techniques come from the various physical situations of everyday life, such as eating, walking and even sleeping.

Gyaku-uchi
The Cross Throw. The hand starts near the opposite side of the body, as though the arms were crossed, and travels horizontally during the throw. This is a fast, hard-to-see movement. 

Shitate-uchi
The Underhand Throw. While walking or standing naturally, the shuriken is thrown from behind the hip. The hand will snap back after the release. Be careful not to accidentally throw the shuriken to the rear.

Za-uchi
The Seated Throw. While in seiza, the shuriken are held in the left hand at the left hip. The right hand, holding one blade, sits at the right hip. One must be very still and refrain from moving until the moment of the throw. 
When you are ready, then the right hand slides up the body, point down, and towards the target in one smooth motion. Be careful not to rise up off the legs or lean too far forward. As soon as the throw is finished, return to your original position and be absolutely still. 

Unlike the standing throw, the left arm does not point towards the target. You will use the left hand to push down against your left hip or thigh to provide power to the throw that the left leg normally provides when standing. This is true for any sitting throw.

Iza-uchi
Throwing From a Chair. This technique as almost identical to za-uchi. The trick is to rest lightly in the chair, allowing both heels to float. Your hands start out in your lap, under the table. When you throw, use the balls of your feet to control your body. Be careful not to strike the underside of the 
table when you raise the shuriken to throw. As with za-uchi, you slide the blade up your body.

Aruki-uchi
Throwing while walking. Facing the target and from mid-stride, throwing the blade is relatively straightforward. Walking past a target or at an angle to the target is more difficult. One must turn the body from the hips as one throws. This takes much practice but is a valuable skill to have.

Ne-uchi
Ne-uchi means throwing from a sleeping position. Try to relax as though you really are sleeping and close your eyes. Open your eyes, lift your head to see the target and then throw the shuriken. Before you throw the next shuriken, put your head back down on the floor and close your eyes. You want to practice from a “sleeping” state, not just lying down. (Be aware that your legs and crotch are now in a vulnerable position should your shuriken bounce off the target.) 

To practice ne-uchi, lie down, relax, and close your eyes.

Wake up and bring the blade to the start position.

Complete the throw at your target.

There are other techniques that will aid your ability to survive, but we don’t necessarily need to worry about proper Japanese names nor formal methods for practice. Here are a handful of the most common:

Two Shuriken in One Hand—As the title suggests, you hold two shuriken in one hand and throw them in succession or at the same time. The grip is different depending on which method you choose. If you throw two at once, there will be more of a shocking effect on the opponent, but penetration will decrease as the arm is having to throw twice the weight at the same time, slowing the blades down. If you throw them in succession, you can get the same depth of penetration, but learning to do this well takes effort.


Decoy Throw—Once you master the art of throwing two shuriken from the same hand in succession, then you can throw a decoy shot. The first shuriken is thrown slowly, in an upward fashion, towards the face. It will easily be seen and avoided by the opponent, but the second shot will come down fast and hard while he is busy avoiding the first blade. The first blade does not need to be thrown well; it is merely a distraction, but if you can stick the first shot, do it.

Feints—This is a simple technique wherein you pretend to throw your shuriken, disturbing the opponent and weakening his ability to perceive the real attack.

Throwing With Both Hands—You may throw shuriken from either hand, either in succession or at the same time. It is always a good idea to train both hands as you never know when one hand will become injured, 
but being able to rain shuriken down on the opponent is also a good thing. Keeping some shuriken on both sides of your obi, you can continuously draw and throw shuriken from both hands without stopping until you are out of blades. When your hand finishes the release of one blade, instead of pointing at the target, it draws another from your belt. You are not limited to merely having blades on both sides of the belt. You can draw them from behind your neck, inside your jacket, and any other place. Just remember that the end of each throw is the draw for the next for that hand.


Piercing the Ground—If you were fighting on wooden flooring, as Japanese castles and shrines have, you could throw and stick a shuriken in the planks near the feet of your opponent. Obviously, sticking the blade in his feet would be more effective, but if you should miss, you might want to consider the effect that it will have on his mind. Do not consider it a defeat. He will not know if you meant to strike his foot or the ground, so keep your poker face (75% of budo is psychology)! The sound of a shuriken sticking into wood can be quite loud and disconcerting, especially when it is close to your feet. The protruding blade has now become an obstacle to his smooth footwork, which could cause a swordsman to lose his balance. 
Also, you might wish to intimidate someone of unknown intentions without causing injury.

Rolling and Throwing—You should practice ukemi (rolling) and throwing. You can throw before you roll, as you begin to roll, during the roll and after the roll. Shuriken dojos often have slick flooring, so be careful not to slide into the target when you roll. Do not get disoriented and throw the blade in the wrong direction.

Yadone (Yah-doe-nay), arrow and shuriken avoidance—This is a very rare skill, taught and practiced by only one or two schools in Japan. Basically, you use a sword, spear, staff or even a bow to shield yourself as you avoid incoming arrows or shuriken. The idea is simple, but it is difficult to mas-
ter. When you know there is a blade coming in, turn your body to the side and hold your sword out in front of you with the blade sideways in your hand. You then divide the world into two halves in your mind. There is one half to the right of the sword and one half to the left. When the opponent launches a weapon at you, you must decide which half it will occupy. When you think you know which one, move to the other half. You move your body, but you do not move the sword at all. It must stay perfectly still. You do not attempt to block or strike the incoming blades with your sword. If they do strike it, that is fine, but of no consequence.

Your sword can help you identify the direction of your movement when dodging shuriken.

If you move too soon, he will see it and strike you. If you try and block with the sword, he will use decoys and feints. If you hold the sword too high, he will throw at your legs and feet.

Shoken-jutsu (Hand-held Techniques)
Shuriken-jutsu is not merely throwing blades or striking a target. The hand-to-hand techniques of the shuriken are really no different from any small weapon techniques. The philosophy behind it is a little different, however. The blade is to be kept hidden from the attacker at all times. 
Since the shuriken is a small weapon and without cutting edges, it is best used to amplify the effects of empty-handed techniques. A shuriken could be used to stab someone in the throat, and that is indeed one of the written techniques. A shuriken could also be used to turn a pinch into something
unimaginably painful. A shuriken can turn a punch into a deep puncture. Shuriken can even be used to trap weapons or fingers and twist the opponent painfully onto the ground.

The shuriken can be used for hand-to-hand fighting.

The first thing you should consider is the small size of a shuriken. They are not weapons meant to be used openly against other weapons. You should move as though you have no weapon at all. Only then will you receive the benefits of a small weapon like a shuriken. If someone strikes at you, don’t think of blocking the attack. Evade the attack and move to a safe place. From that place of safety you may apply your shuriken to the opponent in a subtle way. You need not kill the opponent, but merely gain 
control of him. When studying these techniques, you ought to consider that a shuriken is not required—you could have a pencil or a pen or even a stick in your hand.

You may thrust at an enemy’s vulnerable areas with the point of the blade. Alternatively, you can cut by dragging the point across the skin. Used deftly and secretively, the opponent will not know what is happening until it is too late. This is the art of kakushi buki, hidden weapons. The art of using hidden weapons is keeping weapons out of sight until the very end. If it is possible, keep them hidden even then and afterwards. The courage to wait until the last moment to use a weapon is a requirement of high-level shuriken-jutsu and is far more sophisticated than simply throwing a blade.

Shoken-jutsu, small-weapon fighting, is for an enemy who is close to you. 
Daken-jutsu, throwing-blade fighting, is for an enemy who is out of reach. 

That is not to say that you cannot throw a shuriken at an opponent who is very close to you. You certainly can and with great effect. With daken-jutsu, the shuriken master can utilize the empty space between himself and the opponent. With shoken-jutsu, the distance is zero and yet, you may still 
control it if you keep your weapons secret.

There are some specific hand-to-hand techniques, but really, the waza (techniques) themselves are not important. What matters are the concepts that run through them. We want the opponent to believe we are unarmed and non-aggressive. We want to avoid using any weapons until such time as they may be secretly employed. There are many considerations to be taken into account when using a weapon in self-defense, not the least of which may be the impressions of those who witness the fight. How you behave at such times may have ramifications beyond actual combat. If you are lucky enough to survive, you may have some legal troubles, depending on where you live and the laws of that country. Every country allows for its citizens to defend their own lives, but it will always be better to be seen as a victim who survived than a triumphant combatant.


Let’s start by looking at various ways of holding a shuriken for hand-to-hand use. The shuriken may be held in a number of ways and you may also hold more than one, turning the fist into a spiked weapon capable of attacking in many directions.

The preferred method will always be the one that hides the blade from the opponent. In the photos, the blade is very obvious, but when you train, you should try to develop grips that hide the blade as much as possible. If you can keep the blade covered with cloth, such as your sleeve or a handkerchief, you will have the ideal tenouchi or mochi, which means “grip.” 
Don’t worry about the cloth, the point will go right through it like paper.

Junte Mochi is a stabbing grip. The index fi nger covers the blade and keeps it hidden while providing stability during a thrust.

Gyakute Mochi is also a stabbing grip; the classic icepick grip.

Juji Mochi, or “cruciform grip,” gives you the ability to stab or punch with the blades. This grip is not well concealed but does provide lots of options.

Junte Mochi No Ni (junte mochi #2) is a means of utilizing the point of the blade to control the opponent by turning a simple pinch into an agonizing experience. 

Junte mochi is for stabbing or punching. Gyakute mochi is a downward stabbing grip.

Juji Mochi grip is good for Junte mochi no ni is for pinching, punching and stabbing.

Here are some examples of shuriken being used in combat. They feature a simple bo shuriken, a Tsugawa Ryu blade and an Iga Ryu blade. At all times the movement is light and without force. Shuriken have sharp points; that is all the motivation the opponent will need to move the way you want him to move. Having said that, don’t injure your training partner. People who often cause injuries to their training partners have a low level of skill. Budo IS control; controlling yourself.

Standing in shizen, the bo shuriken is hidden. Evade the cut, use shuriken to control his hands.

Lift his right elbow and keep moving lightly. Slide the shuriken up to his throat.

A small blade can do a great deal of damage. Standing in shizen, the Tsugawa Ryu 
blade is hidden.

Step inside the cut and bring the shuriken Using the upper point, lift his elbow.
up to the inside of his elbow.

The blade’s position when used to Bounce the point down into his throat.Raise the elbow.

From shizen, the Iga Ryu blade evades the cut first, then is hidden. Bring shuriken to his sword.

The Iga Ryu blade while holding the sword. Step forward and raise his sword.

Keep moving and raise the blade. Bring the blade up to his neck.

You could also employ shuriken to increase your own defensive capabilities when using other weapons like the sword. You could tie the blades onto other weapons with a piece of rope or simply hold them in your hands in between the weapon and your palm. Some blades were actually designed for this purpose, such as the shaken of the Shinkage Ryu.

Shinkage Ryu senban have a hole Tsugawa Ryu blade and sword for threading a cord. gyakute mochi.


Here is the junte mochi no ni (pinch grip) in action. You get a piece of him and apply the point gently. It is important not to pinch too hard, or you may drive the sharp point through his skin and into your own thumb. If the point does penetrate his skin, move your thumb off to the side to 
protect yourself.

Use the thumb to push Hold your thumb steady and some skin onto the point. Let him do the damage to himself.

You may also use shuriken to increase the effectiveness of other martial arts techniques such as punches, throws and joint manipulations, such as omote gyaku. Be very careful with this aspect of training. Metal is totally unforgiving of human flesh and it will cut skin and break bones with only 
a little force.


Insights

The Step
During the beginning movement of the throw, your upper body pulls slightly towards the rear and your weight transfers to your front leg. However, you must stay balanced and light on your feet. During the throw, a half step is sufficient. At the end of the throw, your upper body should not hang over 
your leading leg. Be careful not to lean over or twist your body to the point that your head goes past your front foot (a common error). Power will be robbed from the throw if the step forward is too large. 

The heel of your stepping foot is allowed to make contact with the ground first. (Lightly…don’t slam your feet into the ground.) That foot rolls onto the floor, heel to toe. If your foot just slaps onto the ground, it will disrupt the natural movement of the throw. (And you may fall over). The foot should roll onto the floor, allowing you to generate more power for the throw. You must allow your body to throw the shuriken and resist the urge to make it an action of merely the hand and eye.


Anchor Points
When you bring the shuriken up to your head to throw it, there are anchor points you can use, according to the type of shuriken you are throwing. By “anchor point” I mean the places on the head your wrist makes contact. If you are using a heavy shuriken, your anchor point should be at the rear of your head, behind and above the ear. Medium-sized shuriken, like Meifu Shinkage Ryu blades, should be held at the side, above the ear. Smaller shuriken should be held at the front of the head above the eyebrow. Also, 
when you are very close to the target, the more forward your anchor point should be, regardless of size. When you throw from the rear anchor point, your throw will be longer and slower. When you throw from the front anchor point, your throw will be shorter and faster.

The Throw
The throw is not merely a movement of the arm. It is a release of a spring created with the whole body. The arm moves from the right side of the head down towards the left hip. It moves in a natural arc and it is easy to concentrate the power of the whole body into the shuriken. Don’t think about this too much; just keep it in mind when you practice.

Hand Development
The throwing hand will develop through practice. The muscles that squeeze the little finger and the thumb together will get bigger and stronger. These muscles increase the power and control of the grip, and this is necessary to develop the high-speed throw of the Meifu Shinkage Ryu. If you look at these pictures, you will see that Otsuka Sensei’s hand muscles are so developed that he can pinch a shuriken or a pencil and hold it in the palm of his hand. This takes years of training.


The Throwing Arm
Your throwing arm is attached to your body at the shoulder. Its movement is therefore circular. The shape of the throwing arm, however, is that of several angles. The elbow and the wrist are held at constant angles throughout the throw.

You do this to keep the shuriken vertical, pointed at the sky, all the way to the end and even after the shuriken has left your hand. If you let your arm go loose or your wrist bend forward, the shuriken will be affected by the circular movement of your arm and will spin uncontrollably away. This is a diffi cult thing to do for many people, but if you train slowly and let someone watch you from the side, then you can integrate it into your training. It might be useful to remember that we are not really “throwing” the shuriken, but rather casting the shuriken. Imagine that your arm is like a gear in a machine. It rotates from the shoulder, but it does not change its shape. Later on, you will learn the wrist snap and that does change the shape of the arm to a degree, but if you don’t have this angular-arm concept down first, you will not be able to do the wrist snap properly. You MUST keep your wrist vertical throughout the entire throw.

The Left Hand
In the old days, the left hand of a warrior would rest constantly on the left hip, holding the sheath of his sword. The sword could be drawn at any moment, so the left hand was kept ready at all times. Please keep that in mind when you practice. Before you throw, the left arm is to remain straight. During the throw the left hand comes to the left hip, when you may take another shuriken with your right hand or draw your sword. The pulling back of the left hand to the left hip assists the body in throwing the shuriken. The left hand also assists the right hand during the snap shot. At the moment of the snapping of the right wrist, the left hand is also snapped back quickly to the body.

Both arms move at the same time, creating a smooth, natural throw. Remember to hold the extra shuriken lightly near the points. Gripping the centre of the blades makes them difficult to draw. When the shuriken are held in this manner, the tails of the blades spread out, creating the shape of an opened fan.

Zanshin of the Meifu Shinkage Ryu 
In many martial arts, there is a concept known as zanshin. Zanshin can be translated as “remaining spirit.” Basically, this refers to the mental state of the student in the moments immediately following the completion of some technique. In sports, it may be acceptable to stop and observe the results 
of your actions to see how well you may have done. It may also be acceptable to express your emotions about your success or failure. In budo this is not an acceptable practice. You must remember that there will always be another enemy who comes along. It is never “over.” Even when you have thrown all of your shuriken, you must remain in a state of preparedness. It makes no difference whether you stick all your blades in the center of the target or whether they all hit the floor. Training and fighting are the same. 
You must stay focused, alert and calm. You must maintain your kamae (posture) and your attitude. You neither congratulate nor berate yourself. 
Training is a kind of fl ow that continues regardless of the physical results of any given technique.

Zanshin has another meaning. It is a way of cultivating the determination necessary to survive in combat. This determination is very important to you as a student of budo. Without it, your training will be in vain. A strong spirit is more important than a trained body. This is what we mean when 
we say someone is a “natural warrior.” Even without training, some people have this kind of spirit. Regardless of where you begin, however, that spirit must be cultivated through training. 

Ideas for Practice
Correcting for height is relatively easy. To strike higher, release sooner. To strike lower, release later. If your shuriken are veering left or right, most likely it is because your grip is not correct or your wrist is bending during the throw. Have someone observe your wrist as you throw.

Strength and Weakness
Throwing the shuriken as hard as you can will not yield good results. Not only is it incorrect technique, it is dangerous: shuriken thrown with too much force will bounce off of the target and may strike you or an innocent bystander. Try instead to use only 50 percent of your strength. 

This is not just “advice.” People who consistently throw shuriken too hard and cause dangerous ricochets can be kicked out of the school if they fail to observe safe training procedures. I have seen 
it happen. Everybody makes mistakes from time to time, but consistently putting other students in danger by ignoring the teacher is unacceptable. Don’t be one of those people and don’t train anywhere 
near them. You only get two eyes and you don’t want to lose one.

There are other kinds of strength besides sheer muscle. Once you gain the feeling for the throw, you will see how physical power should be applied. If you like a challenge, try throwing the shuriken with the absolute minimum amount of strength you can use. When throwing in slow motion, if your technique is not close to perfect, the shuriken will not stick in the target. Being able to stick a blade in the target without using any strength is fairly difficult, but if you can do it, then your powerful throws will be devastating. This is how you develop a powerful throw—training without power. Visitors to the dojo often stared at this training and assumed that we were beginners. Once Otsuka Sensei explained the difficulty and advanced nature of this kind of training, it became a challenge and many tried to do 
it, only to discover that very few of them could. Training slowly and with no muscle will teach you to throw naturally and correctly. This has nothing to do with how long you have been training. Beginners and advanced students should be training in this way.

Knowing the Distance
Knowing the distance between yourself and the target and how to throw the shuriken from that distance is a fundamental skill you must learn. You will learn it in practice over time. Many students want to measure their progress in distance from the target and that is fine, but your ultimate goal is to not 
consciously know the distance and still be able to hit the target every time. The body will learn this, not your mind. To improve this ability, take a step to the rear after each successful throw. When you reach your limit, start over from there and move closer to the target after each successful throw. 
Having said that, please understand that distance does not equal mastery. Yes, being able to throw from longer and longer distances is a sign that you are learning how to brush the shuriken well, but this is not mastery. Mastery is the ability to throw the shuriken hard, fast and straight with very little visible body movement. Your training should not be focused on distance from the target. Your training should be focused on the skills that will lead you to mastery. Train slowly, as slowly as possible. 

Don’t neglect practicing at close distances. The desire to advance in skill by throwing from longer distances should be ignored. That is not skill. Skill is knowing the distance wherever you may be and sometimes that means close enough to kiss. Remember to wear eye protection when you practice at close range . 

Put Your Mind in the Blade
During practice, most beginners think about the target. They think about where they want the blade to go and they think about the blade sticking in that spot. This is incorrect. Eventually, your blades will naturally go where you want them to go and stick. During training, however, you need to put your awareness into the shuriken itself. Focus on the orientation of the blade throughout the throw and even as it flies through the air. It takes a considerable degree of concentration to teach the body how to throw a shuriken with precisely controlled rotation. Do yourself a favor and forget about the target completely, if you can. The sooner you do, the sooner you will find your blades piercing it with regularity.

Training, Targets, and Safety

Safety is the most important thing, always. Safety for you and your fellow students and any observers must come before any other concerns. These are real, dangerous weapons that are designed to cause injury and death. Unlike many schools, we train with live weapons. Never lose your respect for any 
kind of weapon. They are not toys.

Keep your shuriken clean and devoid of rust or blackening chemicals. A small cut is one thing. A cut that introduces rust into the bloodstream can kill you. Blackening chemicals will give the shuriken a stickiness that can cause you to lose control of the blade during the throw, which is very unsafe. Please remove all rust and blackening chemicals with some kind of mild abrasive and coat the blades with a small amount of oil. When you are ready to throw, wipe off the oil. When you are finished, wipe the blades off and re-oil them. Reshape the tips with a fine stone when they become dull. Dull shuriken are more likely to bounce out of the target, which makes them more dangerous to you. When honing the tips, take your time, use gentle pressure and try to remove only the minimum amount of steel. Don’t 
use a grinder!

Over the years, various ways of storing shuriken have been used. Cloth rolls, wooden boxes, eyeglass holders, pencil cases and other similar items work well. For some shaken, the old ten-pack floppy disk holders work like a charm. If you use a metal container, it might be a good idea to line the inside walls with felt to keep the points from being dulled. None of these containers will keep them completely rust-free, however, so take them out and clean them once in a while.

As for a training space—You will need a fairly high ceiling if you train indoors, preferably ten feet if you want to throw more than 10 feet. You will need lots of padding to protect the walls and floors behind and underneath your target. Tarps, blankets, foam padding, insulation and cardboard will suffice. During normal classes, we use squares of carpet and cardboard under a tarp to protect the floor. We use solid foam boards of wall insulation to protect the walls. At the training camps, we tend to use only tatami mats for targets and to protect the floors. 

Stretch your wrists and fingers backwards for several minutes before throwing. Stretch your back and hip muscles as well.

Targets can take many forms. In Japan we use old tatami mats. As they get old, they get soft and make an ideal target. They are messy, however. Sometimes we use rubber jigsaw mats that are doubled up, about 1 inch thick. The target needs to be as tall as a man and wider than a man (about 6 feet by 3 feet). Please do not use wooden targets for bo shuriken. Wood tends to deflect bad throws with efficiency, increasing the danger to you and bystanders. They are also noisy and require a perfectly horizontal throw to stick. You don’t want the blade to stick horizontally. Ideally, the tail should 
be pointing down a little bit in order to add to the penetration of the point. The blade rotates in flight, so if the blade strikes horizontally, it will slap the target upwards expending its energy with the tail. If the tail is pointed down a bit, that rotational energy will help drive the point in deeper.

For shaken, wooden targets are fine. Soft pine makes an excellent target. For the vertical throw, arrange the target with the grain vertical. For the side-arm throw, arrange the target with the grain horizontal. Plywood and other hard substances are not recommended. These weapons were designed 
to cut and penetrate skin and muscle, not dense materials.

Remember that it is great if your blades penetrate the target deeply, but as long as they strike point-first, even if they bounce out, then the throw was successful. These are weapons designed to cause injury and remaining in the wound does not increase the amount of damage. In general, a good throw will stick in a good target. Don’t change your throw from what you have been taught in order to improve your chances of sticking the blades in a difficult target material. This is budo. Your real target is human skin, muscle and bone. Keep that in mind.

There are three ideal bull’s-eyes on each target: Face/throat, hands/groin and the insteps of the feet. These three targets may represent different areas if you are throwing from a seated position against a seated opponent. Traditionally, these targets are indicated by a small black circle about 1 inch in diameter, but feel free to draw a human silhouette if you like. We did this in Japan and it quickly became the favorite target in the dojo. You may also consider other targets if you like. The kneecaps would make excellent targets, although they may be hard to hit. Try not to prejudge the value of various targets. The face/throat is a sensitive and potentially lethal target, but a wounded hand will make it difficult to wield a weapon. Wounded feet have difficulty walking. At sea level, the blood pressure in your feet is three times as high as the blood pressure in your head. They bleed profusely when cut. The wound pictured below was caused by someone else’s ricocheting blade. If my foot had been the actual target, there would have been a lot more blood. In your training bag, it is a good idea to keep a supply of alcohol wipes and adhesive bandages. You will sustain small injuries in class; that is unavoidable when dealing with live weapons.

Feet can make a good target if you’re not careful.

For beginners in the Meifu Shinkage Ryu, there are some special training methods available. The first method involves the use of specially constructed practice shuriken. They are simple to make. You need some small Styrofoam balls, chopsticks and rubber tubing. Cut the chopsticks down to 6 inches (15 cm) in length, insert them through a 5-inch (12 cm) piece of the tubing and push on the Styrofoam ball. With a partner, practice throwing them to each other. You are not trying to strike your partner; you are trying to throw the practice blade in such a way that the ball stays on top and the blade does not tumble or turn in the air. It’s harder than it sounds, but it is excellent training.

Another good idea for beginners is “chopstick training.” Otsuka Sensei devised this method of training his new students to feel the “brushing” of the fingers down the back of the blade. Chopsticks are much lighter than real shuriken, so developing the necessary sensitivity to throw a chopstick makes the real thing that much easier to do. All you need are some of the unlacquered wooden chopsticks of square cross-section and a foam bath mat. You may wish to slightly sharpen the points of the chopsticks and oil them to give them some weight. Once you have your target mounted, you may practice the basic throw. One of the great things about chopstick training is that it is almost impossible to cause serious property damage. You can still put out someone’s eye, however, so treat them like weapons, because they are. Once you have mastered the basic throw with the training shuriken and the chopsticks, throwing the real shuriken should seem pretty easy. 

These training shuriken can help students work on throwing techniques safely.

